README.md, before:

# MUVR
**Multivariate methods with Unbiased Variable selection in R**  
Associate Professor Carl Brunius  <carl.brunius@chalmers.se>  
Department of Biology and Biological Engineering  
Chalmers University of Technology www.chalmer.se

## General description
The MUVR package allows for predictive multivariate modelling with minimally biased variable selection incorporated into a repeated double cross-validation framework. The MUVR procedure simultaneously produces both minimal-optimal and all-relevant variable selections.

An easy-to-follow tutorial on how to use the MUVR package for classification, regression and multilevel analysis can be found at this repository at [Tutorial/MUVR_Tutorial.docx] (https://gitlab.com/CarlBrunius/MUVR/blob/master/Tutorial/MUVR_Tutorial.docx)

In brief, MUVR proved the following functionality:
- Types: Classification, regression and multilevel
- Model cores: PLS and Random Forest
- Validation: Repeated double cross-validaiton (rdCV; Westerhuis et al 2008, Filzmoser et al 2009)
- Variable selection: Recursive feature elimination embedded in the rdCV loop.  

## Installation
- You will need to have installed R (https://www.r-project.org/)
- Normally, you will want to work in RStudio (https://rstudio.com/) or some other IDE

You also need to have the `remotes` R package installed. Just run the following from an R script or type it directly at the R console (normally the lower left window in RStudio):
```
install.packages('remotes')
```
When `remotes` is installed, you can install the `MUVR` package by running:
```
library(remotes)
install_gitlab('CarlBrunius/MUVR')
```

In addition to functions relevant for crossvalidated, predictive multivariate modelling, the MUVR package also provides data to accurately reproduce figures from the original *Shi et al* paper (below).

## References
- *Shi L, Westerhuis JA, Rosén J, Landberg R, Brunius C 2019. Variable selection and validation in multivariate modelling. Bioinformatics. 2019, 35(6), 972–80.*
- *Filzmoser P, Liebmann B, Varmuza K 2009. Repeated double cross validation. Journal of Chemometrics 23(4), 160-171.*
- *Westerhuis JA, Hoefsloot HCJ, Smit S, Vis DJ, Smilde AK, Velzen EJJ, Duijnhoven JPM, Dorsten FA 2008. Assessment of PLSDA cross validation. Metabolomics 4(1), 81-89.*

## Version history
version | date | comment
:------ | :--- | :------
0.0.975 | 2021-09-21 | Fixed methParam bug
0.0.974 | 2021-07-16 | Cleaned up & commented MUVR code, added ranger implementation (modified rfInner, added rfPred)
0.0.973 | 2019-09-05 | Added customParams() for tweaking inner modelling parameters (robustness limit, nComp (PLS), ntreeIn, mtryMaxIn, ntreeOut - so far not mtryMaxOut)
0.0.972 | 2019-01-22 | Added ylim to plotMV()
0.0.971 | 2018-05-15 | Added permutations() and permutationPlot()
0.0.970 | 2018-05-07 | Bugfix plsInner/BER for comp=0 (i.e. not modellable data)
0.0.969 | 2018-05-02 | Fixed fitRankRep and fitRankAll similar to fitRank (NA-problem)
0.0.968 | 2018-04-24 | Added boolean scaling option (T/F) to MUVR for whether to perform scaling to unit variance & added preProcess function
0.0.967 | 2018-04-17 | Added Balanced Error Rate as fitness metric & improved fitRank calculations
0.0.966 | 2018-02-17 | Bug fix predict.plsMUVR
0.0.965 | 2017-11-06 | Segmentation for DA & dependent samples -> vectSamp(unikID)
0.0.964 | 2017-10-16 | Fixed geometric averaging for nVar in MUVR, fixed plotStability, plotVAL and workflows in inst/workflow folder
0.0.963 | 2017-10-16 | Fixes in plotStability, plotVAL and MUVR2
0.0.962 | 2017-10-04 | Fixed misindexing in pls function (nzv in now before variable allocation)
0.0.961 | 2017-10-03 | Removed dependency on mixOmics by adapting pls functions from mixOmics v 5.2.0. Revamped MUVR.
0.0.960 | 2017-09-22 | Fixed bug with PLS-DA and no successful model -> return NA. Added `cut` to plotVIP and minor fix in MUVR
0.0.959 | 2017-06-20 | Fixed plsInner error with DA and matrix format
0.0.958 | 2017-06-01 | Fixed plsInner 'drop' error
0.0.957 | 2017-05-22 | Added `getVIP`
0.0.956 | 2017-05-18 | removed old nzv code in plsInner and MUVR
0.0.955 | 2017-04-20 | `plsInner` now decreases ncomp if producing NAs. Also cleaned up some code in `MUVR`
0.0.954 | 2017-03-09 | Added `biplotPLS`
0.0.953 | 2017-02-14 | Added `pPerm`, `plotPerm` and `plotVIP`
0.0.952 | 2017-02-07 | Updated plsInner -> removes comp if error
0.0.951 | 2016-12-12 | Updated plsInner -> deals with NA
0.0.950 | 2016-11-16 | Added first version of predict function `predMV` (for PLS regression) and tweaked MUVR to allow for submodel predictions
0.0.945 | 2016-11-14 | Added choice of Y in ML (for easier permutation analysis)
0.0.944 | 2016-11-10 | Added choice (non)-parallel
0.0.943 | 2016-07-25 | MVWrap -> MUVR & Included VIPPerRep in MUVR and RDCV.
0.0.940 | 2016-06-08 | Added `rdCV` algorithm. Updated `workflow.r`
0.0.932 | 2016-04-27 | Updated `rfInner` and `MVWrap` for ML-RF.
0.0.931 | 2016-03-31 | Added R2 and Q2 for regression. Fixed yPred (previously Min for all methods!)
0.0.930 | 2016-03-08 | Recoded ML to regression. Added plotMV. Migrated `Issues` to GitLab.
0.0.920 | 2016-03-07 | Recoded DA (also multiclass) for PLS and RF
0.0.913 | 2016-03-06 | New index functions: apply/rank -> rank(colMeans)
0.0.912 | 2016-03-06 | Added plotVAL
0.0.911 | 2016-03-03 | RF regression works in sequential mode 
0.0.910 | 2016-03-01 | Fixed PLS: DA, reg, ML, nearZeroVar
0.0.900 | 2016-02-10 | Started to work on wrapper for MV-methods. Switched from GitHub to GitLab

Commit message:

Updated predMV (class attribute order bug)

README.md, after:

# MUVR
**Multivariate methods with Unbiased Variable selection in R**  
Associate Professor Carl Brunius  <carl.brunius@chalmers.se>  
Department of Biology and Biological Engineering  
Chalmers University of Technology www.chalmer.se

## General description
The MUVR package allows for predictive multivariate modelling with minimally biased variable selection incorporated into a repeated double cross-validation framework. The MUVR procedure simultaneously produces both minimal-optimal and all-relevant variable selections.

An easy-to-follow tutorial on how to use the MUVR package for classification, regression and multilevel analysis can be found at this repository at [Tutorial/MUVR_Tutorial.docx] (https://gitlab.com/CarlBrunius/MUVR/blob/master/Tutorial/MUVR_Tutorial.docx)

In brief, MUVR proved the following functionality:
- Types: Classification, regression and multilevel
- Model cores: PLS and Random Forest
- Validation: Repeated double cross-validaiton (rdCV; Westerhuis et al 2008, Filzmoser et al 2009)
- Variable selection: Recursive feature elimination embedded in the rdCV loop.  

## Installation
- You will need to have installed R (https://www.r-project.org/)
- Normally, you will want to work in RStudio (https://rstudio.com/) or some other IDE

You also need to have the `remotes` R package installed. Just run the following from an R script or type it directly at the R console (normally the lower left window in RStudio):
```
install.packages('remotes')
```
When `remotes` is installed, you can install the `MUVR` package by running:
```
library(remotes)
install_gitlab('CarlBrunius/MUVR')
```

In addition to functions relevant for crossvalidated, predictive multivariate modelling, the MUVR package also provides data to accurately reproduce figures from the original *Shi et al* paper (below).

## References
- *Shi L, Westerhuis JA, Rosén J, Landberg R, Brunius C 2019. Variable selection and validation in multivariate modelling. Bioinformatics. 2019, 35(6), 972–80.*
- *Filzmoser P, Liebmann B, Varmuza K 2009. Repeated double cross validation. Journal of Chemometrics 23(4), 160-171.*
- *Westerhuis JA, Hoefsloot HCJ, Smit S, Vis DJ, Smilde AK, Velzen EJJ, Duijnhoven JPM, Dorsten FA 2008. Assessment of PLSDA cross validation. Metabolomics 4(1), 81-89.*

## Version history
version | date | comment
:------ | :--- | :------
0.0.976 | 2023-03-09 | Bugfix in predMV (order of MUVROvject class attributes)
0.0.975 | 2021-09-21 | Fixed methParam bug
0.0.974 | 2021-07-16 | Cleaned up & commented MUVR code, added ranger implementation (modified rfInner, added rfPred)
0.0.973 | 2019-09-05 | Added customParams() for tweaking inner modelling parameters (robustness limit, nComp (PLS), ntreeIn, mtryMaxIn, ntreeOut - so far not mtryMaxOut)
0.0.972 | 2019-01-22 | Added ylim to plotMV()
0.0.971 | 2018-05-15 | Added permutations() and permutationPlot()
0.0.970 | 2018-05-07 | Bugfix plsInner/BER for comp=0 (i.e. not modellable data)
0.0.969 | 2018-05-02 | Fixed fitRankRep and fitRankAll similar to fitRank (NA-problem)
0.0.968 | 2018-04-24 | Added boolean scaling option (T/F) to MUVR for whether to perform scaling to unit variance & added preProcess function
0.0.967 | 2018-04-17 | Added Balanced Error Rate as fitness metric & improved fitRank calculations
0.0.966 | 2018-02-17 | Bug fix predict.plsMUVR
0.0.965 | 2017-11-06 | Segmentation for DA & dependent samples -> vectSamp(unikID)
0.0.964 | 2017-10-16 | Fixed geometric averaging for nVar in MUVR, fixed plotStability, plotVAL and workflows in inst/workflow folder
0.0.963 | 2017-10-16 | Fixes in plotStability, plotVAL and MUVR2
0.0.962 | 2017-10-04 | Fixed misindexing in pls function (nzv in now before variable allocation)
0.0.961 | 2017-10-03 | Removed dependency on mixOmics by adapting pls functions from mixOmics v 5.2.0. Revamped MUVR.
0.0.960 | 2017-09-22 | Fixed bug with PLS-DA and no successful model -> return NA. Added `cut` to plotVIP and minor fix in MUVR
0.0.959 | 2017-06-20 | Fixed plsInner error with DA and matrix format
0.0.958 | 2017-06-01 | Fixed plsInner 'drop' error
0.0.957 | 2017-05-22 | Added `getVIP`
0.0.956 | 2017-05-18 | removed old nzv code in plsInner and MUVR
0.0.955 | 2017-04-20 | `plsInner` now decreases ncomp if producing NAs. Also cleaned up some code in `MUVR`
0.0.954 | 2017-03-09 | Added `biplotPLS`
0.0.953 | 2017-02-14 | Added `pPerm`, `plotPerm` and `plotVIP`
0.0.952 | 2017-02-07 | Updated plsInner -> removes comp if error
0.0.951 | 2016-12-12 | Updated plsInner -> deals with NA
0.0.950 | 2016-11-16 | Added first version of predict function `predMV` (for PLS regression) and tweaked MUVR to allow for submodel predictions
0.0.945 | 2016-11-14 | Added choice of Y in ML (for easier permutation analysis)
0.0.944 | 2016-11-10 | Added choice (non)-parallel
0.0.943 | 2016-07-25 | MVWrap -> MUVR & Included VIPPerRep in MUVR and RDCV.
0.0.940 | 2016-06-08 | Added `rdCV` algorithm. Updated `workflow.r`
0.0.932 | 2016-04-27 | Updated `rfInner` and `MVWrap` for ML-RF.
0.0.931 | 2016-03-31 | Added R2 and Q2 for regression. Fixed yPred (previously Min for all methods!)
0.0.930 | 2016-03-08 | Recoded ML to regression. Added plotMV. Migrated `Issues` to GitLab.
0.0.920 | 2016-03-07 | Recoded DA (also multiclass) for PLS and RF
0.0.913 | 2016-03-06 | New index functions: apply/rank -> rank(colMeans)
0.0.912 | 2016-03-06 | Added plotVAL
0.0.911 | 2016-03-03 | RF regression works in sequential mode 
0.0.910 | 2016-03-01 | Fixed PLS: DA, reg, ML, nearZeroVar
0.0.900 | 2016-02-10 | Started to work on wrapper for MV-methods. Switched from GitHub to GitLab
